In 1967, a teenager of barely eighteen turns up one evening at the railway station hotel in Bamako, where a band sponsored by the Malian government, the Rail Band, plays every night. He is not catching any train: he has come to sing. His voice, clear and powerful, immediately stands out among musicians reputed to be among the best in the country. This young man, who has just left his native village of Djoliba, turning his back on part of his family, is named Salif Keita.

He was born on August 25, 1949, in that same village, into the Keita lineage, which claims descent from Sundiata Keita, founder of the Mali Empire in the thirteenth century. But Salif Keita is born albino, a genetic trait that his family's Mandinka culture then equates with a bad omen. According to the profile devoted to him by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, he grows up forbidden to play music, is disowned by his father, expelled from school and rejected by the local aristocracy to which his family nonetheless belongs. His poor eyesight, a consequence of his albinism, also closes off the path he had envisioned, that of a schoolteacher. Decades later, he would sum up for PBS NewsHour the incomprehension he ran into as a child: people, he would say, did not understand how, with a Black mother and a Black father, you could be white.

It is thus estranged from his own family that he joins the Rail Band of Bamako, where he sings alongside the saxophonist Tidiani Koné a repertoire blending Mandinka music and Afro-Cuban influences, for the travelers of the station's hotel-restaurant. In 1973, he leaves for the group Les Ambassadeurs, which he follows to Côte d'Ivoire when Mali's political troubles push the band into exile; renamed Les Ambassadeurs Internationaux, the group records its first album, Mandjou, in Abidjan in 1978.

In 1984, Keita settles in Paris. Three years later, the album Soro, produced by Ibrahima Sylla with the arranger François Bréant, seals his international recognition: carried by an ambitious production blending traditional instruments and synthesizers, it establishes in the international press the nickname that has accompanied him ever since, the golden voice of Africa. For him, music has never been merely a trade: "Music for me is my life," he would tell PBS NewsHour. "It's my freedom. My music give me a possibility to talk to people, to tell them what I want and what I feel." In 1988, he sings in London at the concert given for Nelson Mandela's seventieth birthday, while Mandela is still imprisoned in South Africa.

The albums follow one another: Ko-Yan (1989), then Amen (1991), produced by the jazz musician Joe Zawinul, and Folon (1995), which he dedicates to albino children and around which he sets up a first support association. In 2002, Moffou marks a return to a more organic, acoustic instrumentation, hailed by critics as one of his best records since Soro.

In 2005, he founds the Salif Keita Global Foundation, which has since organized support groups in Mali, Uganda and Tanzania, distributed sunscreen and sunglasses, and funded screening for the skin cancers to which people with albinism are particularly exposed. The proceeds from several of his tours and records have, among other things, made it possible to build a school and a health center in Bamako. In 2009, with the album La Différence, he addresses head-on, for the first time in song, his own condition as a white-skinned man born to Black parents; the following year, the album earns him the Victoire de la Musique for best world music album.

In May 2018, the murder in Fana, in the Koulikoro region, of Ramata Diarra, a five-year-old albino girl, devastates him. In November, Keita organizes a tribute concert in that same town, where hundreds of people march to cries of "never again"; the same year he releases the album Un Autre Blanc, conceived as a farewell to the stage and as a plea. He continues to sound the alarm about the persecution still suffered by people with albinism, in Mali as in several East African countries. "The situation of albinos must be better known throughout the world," he was still saying in 2022 to Africanews, calling for international mobilization so that those responsible for these crimes are punished.

His retirement does not last. In 2023, in a hotel room in Kyoto, on the sidelines of the Kyotophonie festival, he records the acoustic songs of a new album, So Kono, released in 2025; on the track "Proud," in particular, he sings of his pride at being both albino and African. He is already preparing a new album with full orchestra for 2026. From this life built in spite of a father who disowned him and a school that excluded him, Salif Keita today draws a different reading. "If I was black, I would have the good eyesight, and I would maybe — I can be a teacher now for 40 people," he told PBS NewsHour. "But now I'm a teacher for a million people."
